Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lops, and today I'm
joined by Doctor Rudolfurzu. He's associate dean at theor
School of Sustainability, being professor in environmental science, professor
of Earth System Science, and senior fellow at the
Woods Institute for the Environment at Stanford University. His
scientific work examines the study of species interactions in
tropical ecosystems from California, Latin America, and other tropical
areas of the world. And today we're going to
talk a little bit about species interactions, hybrid networks,
human activity, biodiversity conservation, the 6th uh mass extinction,
deformation, and other related topics. So, Doctor Diz, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
It's a pleasure to be with you, Ricard. That
sounds like a lot of topics that we want
to examine today, but then we have to do
as much as we can.
Yeah, let's try to cover at least a few
of them. So, let's start with species interactions then.
Uh, COULD you start by explaining what species interactions
are and why is it important to study them?
Yeah, we tend to think that um The ecology,
the scientific discipline that addresses the interactions between organisms
and their environment, we traditionally have thought that those
interactions between organisms and the environment were interactions that
had to do with the physical environment. So, let's
imagine a plant, a plant has to interact with
the climate, the soil. THOSE physical aspects of the
environment. But the reality is that plants and animals
have to interact with other elements of the environment,
the biological elements of the environment. So, for example,
a plant has to interact with animals that might
want to eat the plant, herbivores, or animals that
might want to take the pollen and do the
the fertilization of the flowers and therefore, the reproduction
of the plants. Plants can be interact with fungi
that would be pathogenic or could be uh assistance
in terms of capturing. Nutrients in the roots. And
so really what we um want to emphasize with
this topic is that the fact that plants and
animals and microorganisms, not only do they have to
interact with the physical aspects of the environment, the
climate, the soil, temperature, and so on, but also
with other factors of the environment. And the significance
of that Ricardo, is that um You know, when
plants or or animals adapt to a given condition
of the environment, it is possible that the animals
or the interacting organisms with them react to that
and create a challenge for the plant. Let's imagine
this situation. A plant that lives in a place
where the winter comes at a given time of
the year, the plant can develop the adaptations to
deal with the winter, right? Low temperature the plant
will either drop the leaves or do something. Once
they do that solution, that's it. Now, let's suppose
a plant is being attacked by an animal. The
plants respond by producing some mechanism of defense, let's
say a chemical compound. But that's not the definitive
answer because the animal can evolve the capacity to
deal with that toxin. And now the animal is
on top again of the plant, and then the
plant has to come back again with another interaction.
And so, in the case of interactions with the
physical environment, usually the solutions of the plants or
animals or organisms are um Definite. But in the
case of biological interactions, they tend to be escalating
a a thing that we call co-evolution. And really,
what has happened with the evolution of life on
the planet is very much the result of those
complex interactions between organisms, speech interactions, and co-evolution. That's
the significance of this definition of species interactions.
And so do these species interactions have any influence
on how we understand how evolution plays out? Or
do they have any specific implications for evolutionary biology?
Absolutely, absolutely. Um, IN the history of the development
of evolution, we have two prominent figures. One of
them was Russell Wallace, the man who was, um,
traveling first in, in South America and then in
Southeast Asia. And then he came up with the
idea of uh um uh natural selection, and then
Darwin panicked because he had not published his ideas.
Um, AND so, Wallace had this very much, um,
the opinion very much on the physical factors of
the environment, and Darwin was of the opinion of
physical, uh, factors of the environment, but also biological
aspects of the environment. And so Darwin, for example,
um, wanted to examine competition and the survival of
the fittest, he called it, you know, in an,
in an environment, plants and animals compete against each
other or plants and animals when they feed each
other. And that created uh many fundamental ideas that
he developed in terms of the principles of natural
selection. Let's imagine the situation to understand um evolution
and adaptation via these processes. Mhm. Imagine that we
have a, a population of plants, uh, uh, and
those plants are the subject of uh food for
some animals, say, say an insect. If for some
reason, some of the plants within the population have
characteristics that prevent them from being eaten compared to
other plants, that is to say the first principle
of natural selection, which is variation within the population,
then the insects will eat the plants that do
not have those characteristics. The plants that have those
defensive characteristics will leave more descendants, the second principle
of natural selection. And third, if those characteristics are
uh genetically determined, then the plant will have an
adaptation as a response, and an adaptive response to
the selective pressure accepted by the animal. So we
can see that these biotic interactions actually reflect splendidly,
the mechanisms of natural selection, leading to adaptations and
eventually to evolutionary processes. So that's the significance of,
of those interactions.
And are species interactions influenced in any way by
ecology? And if so,
how? Yes, actually, uh, we could say, Ricardo that
um ecology is natural selection in action. So the
fact that plants and animals and microbes have to
be uh dealing with the challenges of the environment
and the variation in environmental characteristics, and that is
to say the hetero. Unity of the environment in
space or time, uh, then that drives pretty much
uh the responses of plants for the challenges and
therefore, the evolutionary process. Now, another significance of that
from the human perspective. IS that we tend to
think of these uh interactions as things that happen
in nature and may, may not have direct significance
to us, but the reality is that they are
extremely relevant to us. To give an example, again,
coming back to the situation of plants using defensive
mechanisms. To protect themselves at the taco. Well, plants
have evolved alkaloids, um, um, cyanogenic glycosides, uh, phenolic
compounds, many things that we now, we, I mean,
our ancestors and now today, we have discovered the
medicinal products that we can use for our own
benefit. So really, for example, penicillin is a result
of an interaction between a fungus. And it's, and
it's uh host, and then some people, some, uh,
in this case, some indigenous peoples from Central Mexico
discovered that that fungus actually could be used to
address problems of infections on the, of the skin.
So that medicine actually came from that interaction. Many
plants use um a saletylic acid, uh which is
basically aspirin. Uh, AND now, we know that uh
elicin is a, is a product that has been
derived from the pressure of animals eating these plants
in the genus Salix. And then we understood that
those are the medicine that we use for painkillers,
for example, and the same thing with many alkaloids,
caffeine, morphine, and so on and so forth. Many
of them used for medicinal purposes, and many, many
examples of that. And then, In terms of what
you were asking, sort of the, uh, the directions
of the evolutionary process, there are some beautiful examples.
Let's take the case of the very, very well-known
situation of the monarch butterfly. This is a beautiful
butterfly that everybody knows, or most people know. This
is a fantastic migratory species that moves between North
America and Central Mexico. Anyway, that fantastic uh butterfly
has caterpillars, and the caterpillars are specialized in eating
this particular group of plants called milkweeds. Well, it
turns out that these milkweeds produce um cardioid glucosides,
a compound, some chemical compounds that attack the muscle
of the heart of animals. So it turns out
that the caterpillars can actually eat those uh milk
uh uh milkweed plants, despite the fact that those
milk wheat plants have this very nasty compound. And
so the caterpillars actually, when they eat the plants,
they have the capacity to uh to diminish the
effect, eliminate the effect of the, of the toxin.
But then they pass the toxin from the caterpillars
to the adult butterfly. And then the adult butterfly
has these cartonelloids and it's defended against its predators,
the birds. And then the birds and uh learn
to see, to detect the um um the butterflies,
the monarch butterflies, because of the coloration. In other
words, will try and avoid eating those plants. But
then all the butterflies will imitate the color of
the, of the monarchs to make sure that they
also defend themselves, even though they do not produce
the defensive chemistry. And so you can see this
fantastic network of interactions derived. By the complex ecological
relationships within an organisms cascading down to multiplicity of
phenomena that occur as a consequence of these simple,
apparently simple interactions.
And what are hybrid networks then?
Uh, Netballs, um, imagine this situation when you are
in a, in a community, in an, an ecosystem,
you will have a list of plant species, for
example, and a list of insects that are the
pollinators of the plant species, correct? You want to
know which plant species is connected to which pollinator.
You also want to know this pollinator to how
many plants this is the pollinator of. And so
you have this network of species of plants and
species of animals connected in this interactive network. But
it turns out that the, the plants are also
eaten by animals, the herbivores. And so you want
to see what is the herbivore that eat these
plants and which are the insects that pollinate these
plants. So you have Hybrid interaction of interactions, really.
We could say that this is an interaction of
interactions, uh, uh, create this uh hybrid networks. When
you have multiple levels of interaction, that becomes a,
a sort of a, a multi-scale, multi trophic level
hybrid interactions networks.
And so to get a little bit into how
human activity might impact these aspects of the ecosys
the ecosystem, can these hybrid networks be disrupted by
human activity? And if so, in what ways?
In, in, in, yes, the answer is yes, and,
and, in multiple ways. First of all, um, regards
the mechanisms. The typical mechanisms in which uh human
activities impact the function, the biodiversity and the functioning
and processes of the biodiversity are typically in this
order. Um, FIRST of all, we have, um, land
use change, that is to say, the transformation of
the natural habitats. Everybody has seen images of, say,
for example, in a tropical ecosystem with the, with
the forest coverage uh taken with a satellite image
at a given time. And then you come back
at another time and you see how that forest
has been disrupted, reduced by deforestation. So that is
land use uh change. Uh, ECOSYSTEMS and, and biodiversity
are also impacted by overexploitation. Say, for example, the
overhunting of uh elephants in Africa, so overexploitation. And
then we have the situation of non-native invasive species.
When we humans transform or transport, sorry, animals or
plants from one location to another location, usually those
have negative impacts on the, on the natural local
communities. Third, and then we have that many of
those exotic non-native species are also uh disease agents.
So, for example, you know, um, uh, an, an
animal can come with a pathogen that will infect
the other animals of the place where it went.
And then finally, last but not least, we have
climate change as well. Climate change disrupts, uh, biodiversity
and disrupts all of these interactions. The complexity and
significance of all of this, Ricardo, is that none
of these factors operate in isolation. So, for example,
they are interacting in complex ways. To simplify an
example. If you go to the Amazon, And there
is a process of land use change, the deforestation,
the reduction of the habitat. Well, that destruction and
fragmentation of the habitat facilitates for poachers and hunters
to have access to places that in the past,
they would not be, have access to because the
forest was so extensive, right? So now you have
an effect of the reduction of the habitat which
threatens the populations because the small habitat will not
be sufficient to maintain a viable population. So that's
one factor. And then, but that, that facilitates the
hunting. The hunting per se affects the population. So
we have this compound effect between those two things
in a synergy. Now, bring on to that the
effect of climate change, the effect of invasive species.
So then we have all of these very complex
way of disrupting the abundance, diversity, and the ecological
interactions of organisms. And this is an important lesson,
Ricardo, because now we understand at Certainly in my
laboratory, we're interested particularly in understanding human impact in
terms of species, in terms of populations, but also
we're particularly interested in understanding the influences, negative influences
of human activities on the ecological interactions of organisms.
So, so kind of the, the mission of our
laboratory is to do conservation of ecosystem processes and
ecosystem species interaction.
And so one of the ways by which our
human activity can change hybrid hybrid networks is through
agricultural intensification.
Agricultural intensification is one of the most uh critical
drivers of, um, of disruption of biodiversity, species interactions
and species networks. We do know, Ricardo, that, uh,
most of the transformation of land, what is called
the land use, land use change is driven by
agricultural intensification, particularly the industrialized agricultural uh identification. Take
the case of uh the Midwest in the US,
extensive areas of states such as Kansas and Illinois,
massively transformed in agricultural monocultures for maize, or corn,
or for other, other crops. Take the case of
Southeast Asia, uh, the massive transformation of the rainforest
for the plantations to produce oil, the African, uh,
palm oil. And so, you can see that um
this uh intrification of agriculture, particularly when it's focusing
on monocultural uh agriculture, creates massive, massive disruptions on
the land, the land use change, therefore affecting the
abundance, the diversity, and the interactions of the species
within all of those communities. And our lab, our
laboratory has the mission of understanding these beautiful ecological
interactions like what I described in the case of
the monarch butterfly, but how are those interactions going
to be playing out now that we're doing these
tremendous impacts on nature via land exchange such as
agricultural intensification or overexploitation, or the combination of all
of these factors.
And so, could you just explain a little bit
more why biodiversity conservation is so important because particularly
when it comes to, for example, agricultural activity and
climate change, we hear all the time on the
news that Biodiversity is important. We should care a
lot about biodiversity, but, uh, perhaps people do not
understand exactly why. So what role does biodiversity play,
for example, in ecosystems and evolution?
Fantastic. Yes. So, biodiversity is the fundamental element of
the constitution of species in a network of interactions
in any natural ecosystem. We can talk about biodiversity
as the configuration and integration of, of three elements,
3 levels of integration. Number 1 is the genetic
diversity within populations. Uh, THINK of a case of
any species of plant or animal in a given
ecosystem, you will see that there is variation within
that, uh, population. Take the case of the human
population. We are a species that has genetic diversity.
Take the case of blood types. We have uh
blood type A, type B, type O. So there's
always genetic diversity within the population. So that's the
first level. The second level is the species diversity.
In an ecosystem, you have species, multiple species, right?
So species diversity. And the third level is the
diversity of ecosystems. So if you look at the
landscape, you could have riparian forest, you could have
savannah, you could have uh middle elevation forest and,
and, in the top of the mountains and other
kind of ecosystems. So we have 3 levels of
biodiversity integration, genetic, Species and ecosystem diversity. Well, all
of those are from the fundamental blocks for the
processes that maintain the functioning of ecosystems. Um, AND
so, any disruption in these levels is critical. Now,
the biodiversity is essential to us because many of
the processes that we depend upon are driven by
the configuration of the biodiversity and the interaction they're
in. Take the case, for example, of um Uh,
clean water, right? A forest in a given ecosystem
will, um, capture the humidity, uh, will filter the
water, and then people in the lowland will have
water and quality and quantity. Um, BIODIVERSITY produces, um,
tangible products that we use directly, food, medicines, um,
fruit. Models to produce new kinds of medicine. So,
uh there's a, an aspect of what's called um
biochemical prospecting. So some scientists go around the planet
looking at plants, at, at the diversity of plants
to see what other compounds are not known yet
that could be used for medicinal purposes. We also
depend on biodiversity for the regulation of processes. Think
of the bats, those nocturnal mammals that fly at
night and eat hundreds or thousands of insects that
might eat our crops, and therefore they regulate that
service for the, uh, for the production of food.
Take the case of many animals that will eat
the seeds, the fruit of a plant, and in
so doing, we'll disperse the seed to another location
and maintain the populations of plants. Um, THE pollinators
for the cultivation of many crops are essential because
without bees and other pollinators, the production of fruit
would be very limited. And we also have a
fundamental process. The primary productivity is called the fact
that many organisms in biodiversity, in the biodiversity of
the planet, Uh, can capture the energy of the
sun through the photosynthesis process and use the water
and produce, you know, the bodies, and then the
bodies of the organisms that we eat, the plants
that we eat or the animals that we eat,
animals eat the plants that we eat those animals.
So the food chain, the base of the food
chain depends on biodiversity. And then Ricardo aspect that
people um uh rarely takes into consideration, but I
think it's really relevant. Also, the value of inspiration
and education and motivation. I mean, who would not
be um uh emotionally impacted by looking or by,
by being in a natural piece of, of, uh,
of an ecosystem, in a piece of nature. And
um so all of these things that we call
now ecosystem services are very much essential for the
sustenance of our lives as, as a population. Ultimately,
Ricardo, we can think about it, we eat biodiversity.
So really, it is crucial that we appreciate the
significance of biodiversity and perhaps critically now, what is
happening to biodiversity given the human enterprise.
And so, what would you say are perhaps some
of the main ways by which climate change might
impact the dynamics of animal populations?
In multiple ways. For example, in places that used
to have a given climatic condition, say, temperature, uh,
in a given time of the year, and the
animals are adapted to those climatic conditions, if the
temperature changes and those animals can no longer be
uh Able to maintain the populations on that new
climatic envelope, those animals, if they were the pollinators
of a plant, that will have the local impact
on another element of the, of the system, uh,
in this case, the, the, the plant that they
were the pollinators of. Um, CLIMATE change because of
the rapidity with which it is occurring. It is
quite possible that many species will not be able
to track those climatic uh changes given the speed
with which these are occurring. For example, along the
mountain, the temperature is increasing, particularly in the lowlands,
and so animals or plants have to migrate higher
up in the mountains to maintain or to find,
to track their adaptive. Uh, CLIMATIC envelopes and therefore
they will have to move. But if they encounter
that the areas where they could move, having already
deforested or converted into massive agricultural, they will not
be able to move. So you see the combination
of factors. And again, climate change being a driver
that will change or challenge the species to Move
to different climatic envelopes that they might or might
not be adapted. But it's not only that, because
when a plant or an animal moves to another
climatic condition, as I said at the beginning, as
we discussed at the beginning, it's not the plant
that lives in a vacuum. The plants will need
to have its pollinators and the pollnets. We need
to be able to also track that climatic change.
And so people can understand the complexity of climate
change as a driver of changes in biodiversity, not
only in the species in particular, but on the
network of species that interact with the, with the,
with the components of their uh ecosystem.
So I would like to ask you now about
what some people have been calling the 6th mass
extinction. But just before we talk about these mass
extinctions specifically, what, what is a mass extinction? I
mean, what is an event that uh evolutionary biologists
classify as a mass extinction?
Yes, very good point, uh, Ricardo. So, uh, a
mass extinction is a process of, um, catastrophic, multi-species,
multigenera, multilineages, uh, lost, demise of, uh, of organisms.
Um, NORMALLY, we do have a process of extinction.
Uh, IT would be surprising to our, uh, people
who are listening to us in this conversation. It
would be surprising to them to know that many,
most of the species that, that have appeared on
the planet have gone extinct. So the fate of
the species is to extinct eventually at some point,
but that process usually takes a very long time.
But that is a normal rate of extinction. And
so we know that there's always extinction processes, but
they go at a very low level. Mhm. Oh,
opposite to that, there is a situation in which
a given cataclysmic phenomenon occurs and eliminates that normal
rate of extinction, which tends to be very slow,
very low, then becomes a massive, almost instantaneous geologically
speaking, cataclysmic phenomenon. The case that it is going
to be very easy for our, our audience to
understand is going to be the extinction that occurred
65 million years ago. When this meteorite crashed on
the Yucatan Peninsula in the town of Chikhulu, that
massive um crash impact of this, um, of this
meteorite with, with Earth. TRIGGERED a num a number
of uh physical impacts that led to the extinction,
massive extinction of many organisms, particularly, although not exclusively,
the extinction of the dominant animals of the planet
at the time, the dinosaurs. Uh, BUT many of
the groups of organisms actually went extinct at the
same time. So when you have this, um, emergent
phenomena that imply a massive reduction of the standing
biodiversity, implying not a species, not only a set
of species, genera, but many lineages at the same
time, that is a massive extinction. Now, in the
history of plan of the life, of life on
the planet, We have observed 5 major episodes of
massive extinction. They have occurred um 5 times in
the last 550 million years ago. Uh, THAT tells
us, Ricardo, that this phenomenon is a relatively rare
occurrence in life on the planet. As I said,
5 in 5 and 50 million years ago, on
average, every 110 million years ago occurs a massive
extinction by some um uh extrinsic phenomenon. A massive,
uh, volcanic, uh, uh, multiple volcanic eruption, contamination of
the atmosphere, and so on, or the crash of
a meteorite, those kinds of things. Typically, in those
cases, uh, a high proportion of the biodiversity disappears.
In the extinction of the Permian, it is estimated
that about 90% of all the living species of
the planet went extinct. In the case of the
last extinction, 65 million years ago, massive extinction of
dinosaurs and many other organisms, including plants and animals.
Interestingly though, when those massive extinction processes occur, They
open up the space for other species to emerge
as a consequence of that extinction. But at any
rate, there are the normal background extinctions which occur
at a very low level, and then on top
of that, the rare massive extinction phenomenon. As we
said, there have been 5 in the past, and
now we have fears, we have concerns that the
human enterprise is moving a process that will create
a 6th mass extinction process unless we take action
immediately. We are already in a process. We have
already triggered a massive extinction process. But in this
case, it's driven by one species, our species. But
at the same time, we have the capacity to
understand what are the consequences of our um of
our enterprise. So we should be able to at
least ameliorate the rate of extinction and hopefully prevent
the demise of our companions out. Unique companions on
the entire universe. As far as we know, there
are no other living organisms that could be our
companions anywhere on the universe. So, really, this is
a, a very macroscopic, this is a cosmic phenomenon
that we're facing. Now, critical uh things to discuss
and, and convey to our uh audience Ric regardless
the fact that um Uh, it might be difficult
for people to see that a massive phenomenon of
extinction is occurring because it's a process relatively that
occurs relatively slow, but the, uh, the central point
of the extinction today is the extinction of the
populations. Let me see if I can explain this.
Imagine that in Latin America we have the species
of a cat, the jaguar. This jaguar used to
be present from southern US all the way down
to northern Argentina, right? The speech of Jaguar is
not extinct yet, but in many locations, it is
gigantic distribution from, from south of the US to
to uh northern Argentina. There were many populations of
the same species. Well, it turns out that with
land use change, massive agricultural, urbanization, and so on,
many populations of the jaguar have already gone extinct,
even though the species is still present somewhere. And
so what we have really is a process of
population extinction. When the species at a local level
begin to be declining in their abundance because of
what we do, and eventually disappear from that location,
that is the extinction of that population. When that
process of extinction of population occurs throughout the range
of distribution of the species, then we have the
extinction of the species in the entire face of
the planet. We don't see the um massive extinction
of species at the moment, as clearly as we
see the massive extinction of populations. Um, Two points
to, to clarify here. Um, THE, really the, the
central point, the critical point of extinction now is
the extinction of populations, and we don't tend to
notice because we tend to hear that, you know,
there's still elephants somewhere in Africa, although many populations
have gone extinct. So really, the critical issue is
extinction of populations. Now, the mass extinctions, uh, I'm
sorry, the entire extinction of a species from the
face of the earth, uh, we have calculated that
over the last Um, say, say from year 1500
to now, there have been about 370 recorded complete
extinctions of species of vertebrates. And so we tend
to think, well, 370 is not such a big
number, but it's not such a big number if
we don't look it in the context. We know
that um that extinction that occurring in these, in
these just few years would, should have taken thousands
of years for that to occur naturally. Were it
not because we're present in doing very uh impactful
activities over the course of, of our civilization. So
basically, what I'm trying to say is that uh
the, the, the extinction of species, we have estimated
to be about 100 to 1000 times more intense
than the normal rates of extinction. We're moving towards
a massive process of extinction and the mechanism by
which that is occurring is first by the extinction
of the population. If we continue at the same
rate of extinction of populations, we will definitely trigger
a massive 6 extinction episodes, mass extinction episode of
the plant.
And I think that there are several different important
messages to drive home here because it is very
easy that we see people sort of dismissing this
kind of phenomenon. I mean, basically not giving as
much importance as it has to the extinction of
several. Different species or sometimes even being an outright
uh science denier in the, in this particular case,
I guess that uh many times the climate change
denier and saying that climate change, for example, is
not at all driven by human activity or human
made. But in this particular case of species extinctions
and Some other, of course, uh, environmental phenomena that
we see as the result of climate change. There
are clear signs and there, there are also consensual
among evolutionary biologists, climate scientists, and other people that
this is actually the result mainly of human activity.
Right. Yeah, there is no question about that. Starting
with the climate change, um, we do know, I
mean, we can do a very simple experiment. Do,
um, uh, if we construct a greenhouse in, in
the, in the yard of our home with glass,
right? We do know that we can maintain inside
the greenhouse, we can maintain plants that from, from
a tropical area. Even though you live in a,
in a cold area, in a, a cold climatic
condition, if you build a, a greenhouse, you will
be able to maintain plants there. Why? Because the
radiation that is coming from the sun penetrates through
the glass of the, of the greenhouse, will warm
the, the, the space within the greenhouse, and then
the radiation that should, should go back. TO the
atmosphere is trapped then in the, in the glass.
Well, the glass in the planet is the greenhouse
gasses that we are producing massively, carbon, but also
other critical gasses. Methane, for example, methane is a
very uh intense greenhouse gas. And so, we can
demonstrate precisely that um This phenomenon occurs. We can
do experiments and anyone who has listened to us
can do the experiment and prove unequivocally that this
phenomenon occurs. Second, we have unequivocal evidence that the
concentration of uh, of greenhouse gasses on the atmosphere
is, has been accumulating dramatically over the last few
decades, uh, perhaps a couple of centuries. We have
made the measurements. There's no question the data can
be actually seen by anybody who wants to see
the data. It started with the Mount Aloa uh
station measuring the concentration of carbon in the atmosphere.
And now we know it would take courses of
ice, frozen. Uh, ICE and frozen substrate from the
North Pole or the South poles, and we can
actually measure the amount of carbon in those cores
going back hundreds and thousands of years and compare
what we have today, we can see clearly that
uh since we appeared, particularly since the industrial revolution,
we have increased dramatically the concentration of greenhouse gasses.
We increased, no question, we increased the, the abundance
of greenhouse gasses and then we know from the
experiments and from the observation that these greenhouse gasses
create this increasing temperature. Amazingly enough, Ricardo. We do
know that naturally, after the last glaciation, the planet
had a temperature that remains stable and created the
conditions for civilization to occur. But then naturally, the
planet underwent a process of going down in temperature.
There, there was a cooling process of, of, uh,
of the planet. Probably that had to do with
the inclination of the uh Earth's axis. So naturally,
the planet was going, was becoming cooler, but then
we appeared, and then what that tendency that, that
the planet had, we changed the trajectory in the,
in the other way dramatically. So, if anybody who's
listening to us has an alternative explanation for the
climate change driven by humanity, that person should nominate
himself or herself to the Nobel Prize because that
would be an incredible thing to, to, to accept.
We have every single piece of evidence uh showing
that that is the case. In the case of
uh the loss of biological diversity, the areas that
we, we know that the areas have had limited
human of, uh, uh, I'm sorry, limited impact of
humans. For example, the most remote locations in the
Amazon, the most remote location in the Arctic or
the Antarctic, even though those are showing evidence of
human activity, but they tend to have a configuration
of biodiversity that we don't have in the areas
where humanity is developing. Uh, URBAN areas, uh, intensive
agriculture, uh, those kinds of things. So, we have
very clear evidence. We have natural protected areas, areas
that we, humanity, have set aside. To, uh, uh,
safeguard biodiversity in those areas. Well, if you compare
those areas that we, uh, we are protecting actively
compared to adjacent areas which we are not protecting,
and you measure the biodiversity in those areas, there's
no question in equivocally that our human enterprise is
creating those changes. So, we really need to uh
um I mean, listen to this conversation and also,
if we are not being able to convince the
people who are listening to us, they can go
back to the literature, they can go back to
the clear tangible evidence that all of these activities
are driven by, by what we do today.
So now for the last part of our conversation
today, I would like to ask you a little
bit more about potential consequences that these extinction crisis,
if it goes on, of course, uh could have
for us humans. So, how can it actually impact
uh humans?
Yes, um, we do know, Ricardo, we've been take
a historical lesson from, from the history of the,
of the life of the planet. It is interesting
to share this with the with your audience. The
5 mass extinctions that have occurred in the past,
um we know that they obliterated biodiversity. But as
we have seen, as we can see in the
planet, life has been able to come back. No
question about that. Take the case again of the
extinction of the dinosaurs. Only, only 65 million years
ago. And now, Ricardo, as far as we can
tell, now at this moment, where in this last
millennia, we have the maximum biological richness that the
planet has had in its 4 billion years of
evolution. So you can see that after a massive
extinction, life came back and in fact, it became
explosive diversification. Problem is, 22 elements here. One, the
process of recovery of biodiversity to the level that
we had before the extinction, the mass extinction process
takes millions of years. Probably in the case of
vertebrates, the recovery of the same level of regions
that we had before is about 10 million years.
So, for the humanity, for us as species, having
the idea that, OK, we can be relaxed because
the the biodiversity will come back to its previous
level is not consolidation because it will take 100
million years. And I don't think you and I
are planning to live 10 million years to see
the recovery of biodiversity. That is unthinkable for us.
But second of all, what comes back after the
mass extinction process is very different to what you
had before. Again, the case of dinosaurs at that
time, the dominant animals of the planet were the
reptiles. Now, the dominant animals on the planet are
birds and mammals. So very different configuration of biodiversity
and many years for it to recover. So that
is no consolation for humanity. And another thing is
that um you know, to be perfectly um bold
with the audience who are listening to us. We
might be able to survive multiple years, multiple decades,
probably multiple centuries with drastic changes on the climatic
conditions. And there's gonna be a tremendous impact on
society on those. Um, BUT probably that is not
going to be, uh, a massive elimination of the
human species. But if we eliminate biodiversity, probably we
will not be able to survive just a few
decades. We eat biodiversity, we eat the results of
biodiversity. So hopefully, conveying these ideas to the people
who are listening to us will appreciate. Uh, AND
I'm really, uh, thankful that you do these kinds
of, um, of, um, dissemination issues of science, Ricardo,
because people can appreciate the significance of this phenomenon,
the loss of biodiversity, because, as I say and
I insist, the planet will come back, the the
natural elements of the planet. In different modalities and,
and after many millions of years, will come back.
But what is really the existential threat on the
planet is the survival of the species that goes
by the name of Homo sapiens. It sounds bold
and, and um perhaps like a ghastly um conclusion,
but I think it is a responsibility to tell
things as they are. But at the same time,
I want to make sure that we conclude by
saying that there is much to be done and
much that we can do to prevent this, this
massive extinction. First of all, Having an educated and
well, um, a society that is well-informed society, by
mechanisms such as the one you do this dissemination
episodes of podcasts is very important because we need
to understand this phenomenon not only within the scientific
community, but the public in general. Once we have
uh this um appreciation, what all of these uh
become part of the imagination of society at large,
they will be able to demand when you have
elections in a given country or in a given
town. That the, uh uh that the candidates will
present an agenda as to how they will address
climate change, biodiversity change, land use change, and so
on. So we need to have this bottom-up, uh,
pressure or impulse from us by being prepared. We
need to protect what we have of natural reserves
at the moment. Only 17%, about 17% of nature
has been set aside for conservation. We need to
make sure that those areas are definitely well maintained
and safeguarded by diversity because they will be the
source of repopulation. About the invest in other areas
if we become more, um more um wise, wiser
and protect other areas as well. In addition to
that, Ricardo, many of the areas where we have
the last remaining of the rest of the planet
belong to indigenous and native populations. So we need
to understand that. And appreciate the significance of those
populations in safeguarding bioverity for us at the moment.
We need to find mechanisms of compensating, making sure
that they will not be forced to have a
life that uh forced them to continue impacting nature.
We need to compensate. There's a thing called um
payment for environmental services. In many countries in Latin
America and other parts of the world, there are
institutions who are uh financially supporting local communities if
they commit to maintain their natural ecosystem because they
are the sort of the, the stakeholders of this
biodiversity, the main stakeholders of this biodiversity. We need
to, uh, uh, think about our habits of feeding
habits as a, as a human species. The excessive
consumption of meat brings about much deforestation, brings about
much carbon emissions, it brings about health. Problems. I
don't mean to say that tomorrow we should be
vegetarian, everybody, but we should be able to gradually
balance our diet in such a way that we
reduce all of those multiple drivers of, of, um,
of, uh, of change, negative change in our natural
resources. And of course, Ricardo, I think we need
to appreciate the beauty and, and um inspiration that
we have from nature and biodiversity because that is
also, you know, enrichment of our spirit and also
a moral um ethical uh appreciation of uh what
we have today is a result of an incredible
process of trial and error that took 4 billion
years for us to have the richness that we
have on the planet today. I think it's a
cosmic responsibility to enjoy, appreciate, and in so doing,
hopefully safeguarding, safeguarding our own species.
So I think that's a great note to end
on, Doctor Dzu. And just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and your work on the internet?
Yes, um, so I would be delighted to, um
to be contacted, um, in the internet. Uh IF
you go to uh my email, uh R Dzo
R D I R Z O at Stanford EDU.
With that, you will be able to find the
website of my laboratory and you will be able
to see the many publications that we have on
these topics, and also you will to see the
materials that we have for educational purposes to kids
and to members of the public, and also the
of what we're working on and, and the students
that work with us in, in our projects, the
communities that we interact with in, in around the
world. And so welcome to uh to be contacted
via the internet and via the website of our
laboratory. Thank you.
Great. So I'm leaving links to that in the
description box of the interview and Doctor Dzu, thank
you so much again for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been a real pleasure
to talk with you.
Thank you, Ricardo, very much and thank you for
what you're doing for uh in this mission that
we have to affront collectively.
Thank you. Hi guys, thank you for watching this
interview until the end. If you liked it, please
share it, leave a like and hit the subscription
button. The show is brought to you by Nights
Learning and Development done differently, check their website at
Nights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or PayPal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
PayPal supporters Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard
Seyches Olaf, Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim
Hollis, Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then
the Matter Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel
Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France
David Sloan Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punterrusmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Samovallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Francoortolotti Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky,
Scott Zacharyishim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson,
Peter Vozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry
D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then
Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix,
Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van
Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas
Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers
Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.